ChIP-seq analysis
Mapping and peak calling. Sequence read preprocessing and quality assessment of the raw data was performed using FastQC-0.10.1 https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/for quality control. Reads were aligned to the Arabidopsis genome (TAIR10 release) using the software package BWA. Trimmomatic was used for trimming and adapter removal. The software MACS2 was used to call peaks using narrow-peak default parameters for H3K27ac and H3K4me3 and broad-peak default parameters for H3K27me3 and H3K9me2 marks. Only conserved peaks predicted using either Input or H3 as controls were kept for downstream analysis. Narrow peaks were extended +/-250bp from the summit. Bed coordinates files were processed using bedtools. Differential enrichment. We used all combined peak coordinates to evaluate each histone mark signal at each time-point, calculating differentially enriched regions (DERs) using the R package DiffBind using default parameters and H3 as control. Additionally, non-arbitrary profiles were designed allowing the analysis of dynamic behaviors through the experiment. Profile05 is characterized by non-significant changes in H3K27ac until the transition from Day4 to Day7 where the threshold was >2 fold increase and < 0,05 FDR. Moreover, we integrated the 4 different histone marks data with our previous published RNA-seq data by mapping the RNA-seq to the genome by STAR and using bedtools coverage to extract RNA signal at each DER. Transcription factor prediction. DNA motifs were inferred using HOMER Motif Analysis Algorithm combining both de novo and known HOMER motifs. Then, DNA motifs were matched both to HOMER library of reliable motifs and to footprintDB. A final list of transcription factors was curated considering their presence in the total sequences analyzed. Gene Ontology Enrichment and Tree maps. To determine whether any functional categories were overrepresented among genes among the several categories we identified, we performed functional enrichment analysis of GO categories using GOFER (bschiffthaler/gofer3: Gofer3 v0.11. 2020). Go terms were summarized into tree maps using REVIGO. Visualization and Heatmaps. Bam coverage files were converted to bigwig with a 50bp read extension. 2 replicates were merged to visualize each condition. Tracks were visualized in IGV exported as .png and formatted in illustrator. Heatmaps were constructed using bigwigs with deepTools.
